When you hear the word realistic, what comes to your mind?
Realistic conveys the idea of something that is practical, rational, reasonable, and sensible.
Having expectations that are realistic is essential to joy and success in Jehovah's
service.
In contrast, unrealistic expectations cause discouragement, as Proverbs 13-12 says.
Expectation postponed makes the heart sick, but a desire realized is a tree of life.
Appropriately, we often use this verse when referring to expectations that are not achieved
as quickly as we would like.
However, expectations that are too high can also make our hearts sick.
Notice this quote from the August 8, 1983 issue of awake.
Disappointment is often not so much a matter of expectation postponed, as expectations
too high.
Now at times it is good to have high goals, to aim for the stars, but always expecting
to come out on top is a surefire way to beckon disappointment.
To avoid disappointment, our expectation should be reasonable and sensible.
In our discussion, we're going to answer the following three questions about our expectations.
Number one, why must we be realistic about what we expect from ourselves?
Number two, why must we be realistic and what we expect from our brothers and sisters?
And number three, why is it realistic to expect that Jehovah will reward us for our faithful
sacred service?
Our first question is, why must we be realistic about what we expect from ourselves?
Of course, we love Jehovah with our whole heart, mind, and soul, and we want to do everything
for His glory.
However, the reality is that no matter how much we love Jehovah and want to obey Him,
we are sinful descendants of Adam.
As a result, we occasionally transgress and thought, word, and deed.
Ecclesiastes 7.20 states, for there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and
never sins.
And James 3.2 reads, for we all stumble many times.
If anyone does not stumble in word, he is a perfect man.
Perhaps you can relate to the feelings of the Apostle Paul at Romans chapter 7, verses
18-20.
For I know that in me, that is in my flesh, there dwells nothing good.
For I have the desire to do what is fine, but not the ability to carry it out.
For I do not do the good that I wish, but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice.
Not then, I do what I do not wish, I am no longer the one carrying it out.
But it is the sin dwelling in me.
Paul struggled with his sinful flesh, made him feel miserable.
At times, we too might feel dejected, disappointed, and frustrated over our shortcomings.
We may begin to feel like a failure.
Not enable Paul to continue serving Jehovah with joy and zeal.
He honestly acknowledged his sinful condition and had complete confidence in the ransom sacrifice
of Jesus Christ.
Paul went on to say at Romans 7, 24 and 25, miserable man that I am, who will rescue me from
the body undergoing this death?
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Yes, through Jehovah's undeserved kindness and his loving provision of the ransom, we
can confidently remain in Jehovah's love and render worship that is acceptable to him,
even in our imperfect state.
How powerful is the ransom in allowing us to have a clean conscience and retain Jehovah's
approval?
Next, chapter 3, verse 19, answers this question.
Repet therefore and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out so that seasons of
refreshing may come from Jehovah himself.
The original language word translated blotted out means to cause to disappear by wiping,
to remove so as to leave no trace.
You know, it completely wipes out our sin.
Illustrate.
Imagine a white riding surface representing our clean standing before Jehovah.
Now, imagine that red dots are drawn on it representing our sins.
We should not view the ransom as if Jehovah draws an X over each dot to cross them out.
Those red dots would still be visible.
Rather, we should imagine Jehovah based on the ransom completely erasing the red dots
so that a clean white riding surface is restored.
Jehovah further reassures us of the completeness of his forgiveness with the words recorded
at Psalm 103 verses 12 to 14.
Jehovah remembers that we are dust and does not expect perfection from us.
As a merciful Father, He puts our sins as far off as the sunrise is from the sunset.
Even if a servant of Jehovah commits a serious sin.
If he is truly repentant with godly sadness, his sin can be blotted out completely forgiven.
Therefore, it is essential for us to maintain a reasonable, sensible, realistic view of
our imperfect state.
We're going to make mistakes, but we must have full trust in the reality of Jehovah's
forgiveness based on the ransom.
Also, we can learn valuable lessons from our errors so that we'll be less likely to
repeat them.
We need patience, though, because some personality flaws and bad habits may not go away overnight.
Some of them may even be a life-long battle.
At times, we may need counsel and discipline.
What should we realistically expect when receiving discipline?
Hebrews 12, 11 through 13, makes it clear that initially it will not be joyous.
It is painful.
However, when we humbly accept discipline and apply the counsel, we can be sure that
we will gain inner peace and be a better servant of Jehovah.
Therefore, do not give up, but keep making progress.
Never allow the devil to convince you that you are a failure.
As stated in the September 1, 2001 issue of the Watchtower on page 18, Satan would like
nothing better than to rob you of your peace.
He would surely like you to feel that your imperfection makes your service unacceptable
to God.
Never allow the devil to demoralize you.
Our second question for consideration is, why must we be realistic and what we expect
from our brothers and sisters?
Just as it's essential to avoid having expectations that are too high for ourselves, we must
also avoid expecting too much from our brothers and sisters.
Such unreasonable expectations create stress, disappointment, and frustration.
The awake of September 8, 1994 quoted a factory supervisor who said,
you have to accept people as they are.
If you expect more than they can give, you will elevate the stress level, making everyone
unhappy.
We should expect from our fellow workers what Jehovah and Jesus expect from them.
Jesus' illustration of the talents recorded in Matthew chapter 25 conveys their thinking.
The main point of this illustration is that the master Jesus expects each of his anointed
brothers, the slaves, and by extension those who are of the other sheep to do his or her
best in the assigned work of preaching the good news.
How did Jesus distribute the work?
Matthew chapter 25 verse 15 provides the answer.
He gave five talents to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according
to his own ability, and he went abroad.
Jehovah and Jesus are pleased with and will reward each of us when we do our best within
our circumstances and ability.
When the slave of two talents gained two more, the master did not say to him, why did you
not gain five more like your fellow slave?
He gave the two talents slave the same commendation as the one who was given the five and gained
five more.
Well done, good and faithful slave.
You were faithful over a few things.
I will appoint you over many things.
Enter into the joy of your master.
As a result, the two talents slave could be just as successful and joyful as the five
talents slave.
They both met their master's reasonable expectations, and their master was joyful too.
What a fine lesson for all of us, including those serving as elders.
In imitation of Jehovah and Jesus, we should never put pressure on our brothers to do more
than they're capable of doing.
Earlier to take this reasonable and realistic approach, can result in much frustration.
Another way that we show we have reasonable expectations is to acknowledge that from
time to time, disagreements and hurt feelings will arise among our brothers.
Have you ever heard someone say, I expect to be treated that way by the world, but not
by my brother?
Is it reasonable to expect that there will not be any difficulties among brothers?
No.
Does Jesus expect that at times his disciples will have difficulties among themselves?
Yes.
Why can we say this?
Remember some of the expressions Jesus used throughout the sermon on the Mount.
Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.
If you are bringing your gift to the altar, and there you remember that your brother
has something against you, leave your gift there in front of the altar and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.
Forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
Not judging that you may not be judged.
These verses show that Jesus knew his disciples would have challenges among themselves.
That was a realistic expectation, but it's also reasonable to conclude that these problems
can be successfully resolved if godly principles are applied.
When peace can be restored, additionally, we should expect some tensions to arise among
the brotherhood today.
But by applying Bible principles, peace can be restored and maintained.
We'll now consider our third question.
Why is it realistic to expect that Jehovah will reward us for our faithful sacred service?
In Hebrews 116, the Bible tells us that Jehovah is the rewarder of those earnestly seeking
him.
And at 1 Corinthians 1558, the Apostle Paul encourages us to have plenty to do in the work
of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain.
Paul was absolutely sure of his heavenly reward.
Despite his sins prior to becoming a Christian and his battles with sinful inclinations, please
note his confidence, expressed at 2 Timothy chapter 4 verses 7 and 8.
I have fought the fine fight.
I have run the race to the finish.
I have observed the faith.
From this time on there is reserved for me the crowned of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge will give me as a reward in that day, yet not to me only, but also
to all those who have loved his manifestation.
We can have similar confidence in the reward Jehovah has promised.
Whether our hope is heavenly, or to enjoy everlasting life on a paradise earth, this is
a realistic expectation because our reasonable and loving God has promised it and he does
not lie.
Therefore, may we develop and maintain realistic expectations for ourselves and for our fellow
workers.
May we never lose sight of the reality that Jehovah will reward those earnestly seeking
him.
If we have realistic expectations, we can find joy and success in our service to Jehovah
now, as well as have the prospect of doing so forever.